Background
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID 19) is an infectious disease caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). It was first identified in December 2019 in Wuhan, China, and has since spread globally, resulting in an ongoing pandemic. 


Signs and Symtomps
Fever is the most common symptom, although some older people and those with other health problems experience fever later in the disease.  A lack of fever does not verify someone is disease free. Other common symptoms include cough, loss of appetite, fatigue, shortness of breath, sputum production, and muscle and joint pains.

Symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, and diarrhoea have been observed in varying percentages. Less common symptoms include sneezing, runny nose, or sore throat. Some cases in China initially presented with only chest tightness and palpitations. A decreased sense of smell or disturbances in taste may occur.  Loss of smell was a presenting symptom in 30% of confirmed cases in South Korea.

As is common with infections, there is a delay between the moment a person is first infected and the time he or she develops symptoms. This is called the incubation period. The average incubation period for COVID 19 is five to six days but commonly ranges from one to 14 days, with approximately 10% of cases exceeding that time.


Cause
Transmission

COVID 19 is a new disease, and many of the details of its spread are still under investigation. It spreads between people very efficiently and sustainably—easier than influenza but not as easily as measles. This occurs mainly when people are in close contact (two metres or six feet) via small droplets produced during coughing, sneezing, or talking. 

Contaminated droplets exhaled by infected people are then inhaled into the lungs, or settle on other people's faces to cause new infection. The droplets are relatively heavy, usually fall to surfaces, and do not travel far through the air. People can transmit the virus without showing symptoms, but according to the WHO and ECDC, it is unknown how often this happens.

One summary of available studies estimated the number of those infected who are asymptomatic to be 40%. People are most infectious when they show symptoms (even mild or non-specific symptoms), but may be infectious for up to two days before symptoms appear (pre-symptomatic transmission). They remain infectious an estimated seven to twelve days in moderate cases and an average of two weeks in severe cases.

When the contaminated droplets fall to floors or surfaces they can, though less commonly, remain infectious if people touch contaminated surfaces and then their eyes, nose or mouth with unwashed hands. On surfaces the amount of active virus decreases over time until it can no longer cause infection, and surfaces are thought not to be the main way the virus spreads. 


Prevention
Preventive measures to reduce the chances of infection include staying at home, avoiding crowded places, keeping distance from others, washing hands with soap and water often and for at least 20 seconds, practising good respiratory hygiene, and avoiding touching the eyes, nose, or mouth with unwashed hands. 

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recommends covering the mouth and nose with a tissue when coughing or sneezing and recommends using the inside of the elbow if no tissue is available. Proper hand hygiene after any cough or sneeze is encouraged. 

The CDC has recommended cloth face coverings in public settings where other social distancing measures are difficult to maintain, in part to limit transmission by asymptomatic individuals. The U.S. National Institutes of Health guidelines do not recommend any medication for prevention of COVID 19, before or after exposure to the SARS-CoV-2 virus, outside the setting of a clinical trial.

Social distancing strategies aim to reduce contact of infected persons with large groups by closing schools and workplaces, restricting travel, and cancelling large public gatherings. Distancing guidelines also include that people stay at least 6 feet (1.8 m) apart. There is no medication known to be effective at preventing COVID 19. 